You don't have to install any drivers.
It works automatically.
So, can we go to demo four, please?
Just a couple of quick
devices I want to show off.
These are products that
are coming to the Mac.
Thanks.
The first one is made by a
company called 3D Connection.
Ignore the Lab Tech label on here.
3D Connection bought them.
It's a six degree of freedom controller,
and it allows you to move objects in
three-dimensional space automatically.
I have a demo app here.
[Transcript missing]
Still not working, Jeff.
All right, well,
I'm going to skip that demo.
I can assure you that it does work.
The other product that we
have from the same company,
3D Connection,
is a keyboard that has one of the
6-degree freedom controllers built in,
which is very cool.
These kinds of keyboards can
be used to do video editing.
Almost anything where you
need a jog channel would work.
But what I'm mostly interested in
seeing happen is CAD CAM applications
adopt 6-degree freedom controllers.
Afterwards,
if you've got an interest in that,
please come up and talk
to Jeff Lowe and I.
We'd be really keen to work
with you to make that happen.
The final sample device that I have
I want to show off is from ATI.
So probably a lot of you think that
ATI makes really great video cards,
maybe the occasional TV tuner,
but they also make a remote.
And the remote has buttons on it
that will bring up a web browser.
It will play music as well.
Oh,
I'm going to the Apple internal website.
You can play music,
you can control iTunes,
control TV if you've got a TV tuner.
It's a really great little remote.
So with that,
let me turn it over to the guys and
they will go into Hidden Force Feedback.
Thanks.
and Fabio Paz,
the HIID Manager Engineer on
the I/O Kit team for Apple.
And today we're just going to
briefly go over the HIID Manager.
Basically what we'll do is
we'll talk about what HIID is,
the HIID implementation on Mac OS X,
some improvements that we've
added since Jaguar 10.2,
and some techniques for
using the HIID Manager.
Hopefully what you'll learn here is
how HIID fits into Mac OS X and how
to effectively use the HIID Manager.
So first off, what is HIID?
Well,
HIID stands for Human Interface Device.
It was a specification developed
by the USB Implementers Forum to
cover devices that humans use
to interact with the system.
Some examples are your
standard keyboard and mouse,
front panel controls,
which actually might be your controls
on the front of your monitor,
or controls on your USB speakers,
gamer simulation devices like
this steering wheel over here,
or devices that don't actually
require human interaction.
So that would be like uninterruptible
power sources or credit card
swipers or badge readers.
So let's cover some brief terminology.
The first thing is a HIID report.
And basically what this is,
is the raw data that's actually
sent to or received from the device.
It can actually be pulled
or interrupt driven.
And there's really
three types of reports.
Input report,
which is basically reports that
are received from the device,
and it's pretty much read only.
An output report is a report
that's sent to the device,
and it's write only.
And the feature report is
actually a combination of the two.
It can be sent to or
received from the device.
The next term is an element.
And basically an element covers
the parsed items from the report.
The behaviors are actually covered
by its usage and usage page.
And there's really two
different types of elements.
The data element,
which there's three subtypes of,
the input, output,
and feature that we covered earlier,
and a collection element.
and collections actually are useful
for representing relationships
between two or more data objects.
And there's five different
types of collections.
The physical, application, logical,
report, and named array.
The first two we'll actually
cover in more detail.
So this is an example descriptor of a,
of a HID mouse.
So the first item we're looking at here
is actually the application collection.
And what this does is actually
tip off the system of what the
intended behavior of this device is.
The next collection is a physical
collection for the pointer.
And basically what we're doing here
is we're grouping together the buttons
and the axes because it makes sense for
them to be grouped together that way.
And the next example here
is the declaration of the
actual button elements.
So as you see here, we've got a...
A report count of three
and a report size of one.
So basically what we're
doing here is declaring three
objects that are one bit each.
And basically what this will represent
is buttons one through three.
The next items that we're declaring
here are the X and Y axes.
And basically these are two 8-bit values
that represent both the X and Y axes.
Now one thing you'll notice
is that for the buttons,
the input was actually absolute,
and for the axes they're relative.
So basically the absolute type
elements are based on a fixed origin,
or absolute is based on a fixed origin.
- Absolute is based on a fixed
origin and Relative is based on
changing origins from different,
or changing axes from different...
So an example of this would be a mouse
would be a relative type of value,
whereas a tablet would
probably want a fixed origin
or absolute coordinate system.
So now that we've got pretty much a
basic understanding of what HIID is,
we'll kind of jump into how the
stack is actually implemented
on OS X and the HIID Manager.
So basically the HIID Manager is the
abstraction layer of how to interact with
the device for receiving the raw events.
It basically consists of three layers.
The HIID drivers at the lowest layer,
the kernel architecture,
and the user space API.
and this is kind of a diagram showing how
these actually interact with each other,
the application being
up at the top portion,
communicating with the IOHID lib,
which then again crosses the
kernel boundary and communicates
directly with the devices.
So basically,
a HIID driver is an I/O service that's
subclassed off of I/O HID device.
The transport is not
actually restricted to USB,
and it actually provides an opportunity
for other developers to provide support
for serial and FireWire devices.
One thing is, we are normalized on the
USB HIID specification.
So then if you are creating
a third-party driver,
We do ask that you translate the report
descriptor and reports to actually
work with the USB spec so that it
can work fully with the HID Manager.
So an example of a device
that might want to be,
have its own HID driver is
a serial whiteboard device.
Right now, by default,
when you plug it in,
it will not work with the system.
But if somebody writes a specific
driver and goes ahead and creates
a USB report descriptor and
handles and translates the reports,
it'll go ahead and behave like,
similar to a USB tablet.
So the next layer is the I/O HId family,
and it is actually the kind of
the meat of the whole HId Manager.
It's responsible for
doing a lot of the work.
And essentially what it does is it'll
parse the HId reports and split them up
into the individual elements that make
more sense to an application developer.
It also interacts directly
with the I/O HId lib,
and allows like the bridging between
the application and the device itself.
It maintains a shared memory that,
contains the current
values of the elements,
and it also is responsible for
publishing the properties of
that device in the I/O registry.
So this is useful for when you want
to actually match up the device,
locate a device or locate the
different elements within the device.
So when going through the registry,
there are certain key value
pairs that are defined,
and these are located in iohidkeys.h.
So for device-wide constants,
they start with kioHID,
and element-wide constants
start with kioHID_element.
And this will show up later on
as we show examples of what these
things look like in the IO registry.
So this is the example IR registry
entry for a HID device.
Right here, this is just the mouse.
And you know, it has the vendor ID,
the location, transport,
and any other properties you'd
expect for a USB device or any
other device that's a HID device.
The two properties that
you're gonna be interested in
as an application developer,
are the primary usage
and primary usage page.
And essentially what this does is it is
the top level application collection.
And what it is is it tips off to you,
the developer,
what this device actually does.
So right here, the primary usage page of
one is a generic desktop,
and the primary usage two is a mouse.
As you see also at the bottom,
there's an elements property as well,
and that's pretty much the
The I-Registry is an array of
elements that are defined as well.
And so when we go to
the next example here,
this is a collection element and
how it looks inside the registry.
Pretty basic.
It has an element cookie,
which is basically our unique
identifier for that particular element,
and it describes the
usage page and usage.
So you see here,
this is the application collection
that has the usage page of one and two.
So pretty much the mouse,
or describing the behavior of the mouse.
And then here is an example
of the registry entry for
an actual data element.
So once again,
it does have an element cookie again.
So this is the unique identifier
for this particular button.
This is actually button one of a mouse.
And it shows all the other
properties such as the type,
the size, the min, max,
and unit exponent,
anything that would be more
helpful for you to actually
use that particular element.
So now we'll go to the higher
level portion of the HIID Manager.
And this is mostly what
you'll be concerned with as
an application developer,
is the IOHID lib.
And basically it's a
CFPlugin architecture,
sort of like the USB CFPlugin or
FireWire CFPlugin that communicates
directly with the device itself,
or with the IOHID family.
And it's broken up into
three different interfaces.
The IOHID device interface,
the IOHID queue interface,
the output transaction interface.
And each interface is
actually defined by a UUID,
or Universally Unique Identification.
So the first interface, of course,
is the IOHID device interface.
And basically what this is is a
CFPlugin interface that communicates
directly to the device and establishes
its connection to the device.
You use this to read and
post element values directly.
So there's basically two types of APIs.
The standard APIs,
which rely on the parsed items
or parsed elements of the device,
and this is something,
as an application developer,
probably you're going to use
more because you're not really
concerned about how data is actually
laid out in terms of the report.
Now, for more advanced APIs,
getReport and setReport,
these are intended for developers
that actually know that the device
that they're communicating with and
actually know how the data is laid out.
And so you're probably going to want
to use these more advanced APIs.
So the next thing is the Q interface,
and this is extremely useful
for applications that need to
respond to every hit event.
So for example, it would be a,
suppose you have a first
person shoot-em-up game.
You don't want to actually respond to
the current value of that element or,
you know, the trigger button,
but in fact you want to queue up
the trigger button events coming in.
So this will allow you
to effectively do that.
It can actually,
the queue can be set up to be pulled
or receive asynchronous notifications.
And we actually recommend that you use
async notifications as your application
will do less work pulling the queue,
and you almost receive events
almost instantaneously.
And the last kind of interface we have
here is the Output Transaction Interface.
And essentially what this does is it kind
of consolidates the number of reports
that you're sending to the device.
So let's say, for example,
you have a keyboard device and you have
basically three LEDs defined on there,
and you want to toggle the Caps
Lock LED and the Num Lock LED.
Well, if you use just the
IOHID device interface,
you'd set the element value
for the Caps Lock and set the
element value for the Num Lock.
What this does is actually send
two separate reports to the device,
and you might actually be blocking.
What we do here is you would just
add it to Output Transaction,
and now instead of sending
two separate reports,
you'll just send the one down.
And this is kind of a replacement for
Set Report for less advanced users
who don't actually care about how
it's laid out in terms of the report.
So we've had some improvements to the
HIID Manager since Jaguar or 10.2,
and one of the major things
we've added is the ability to
see a HIID events from a device.
And essentially what this does is,
suppose you have a credit card
swiper or a barcode reader.
These devices actually behave
and look similar to keyboards,
and so when you swipe a credit card
or you read a barcode or whatever,
it actually spews out
key events to the system.
And this isn't necessarily behavior
that you actually want to achieve.
It's just a way for the
system to see what happens.
So if you just want your application
to interact with it directly
and only see those events,
you would go ahead and seize
that device and make sure that
the events only come to you.
We've also added some
improvements to the API.
Of course, as you may have known,
in 10.3, to support Force Feedback,
we added two new APIs for
GetReport and SetReport,
which are the more advanced
APIs that I mentioned earlier.
And then new in Panther,
what I've added is the
copy matching elements.
And essentially what this does is
instead of you having to traverse
through the registry to find what
the capabilities are of the device,
all you would do is set
up a matching dictionary,
like you do for finding
a particular device,
to find an actual element,
or to see if that device contains
the behavior that you're expecting.
And another API that we've added is
SetInterruptReportHandlerCallback.
And essentially what this lets you do,
instead of polling a device via GetReport
to get the current report of that device,
this allows you to actually be notified
every time an incoming report comes in
from the interrupt in pipe of the device.
So it's extremely useful for people who
need to know that advanced behavior.
And so, let's start off with some basic
techniques on how to use the
HID Manager in some simple code.
So, if you guys have already messed
around with I/O Kit and know
how to actually match a device,
essentially what we're doing here
is go ahead and creating a matching
dictionary to find a HIID device.
What we're doing though is refining
the search to actually look for a mouse
or all mice devices on the system.
So, what we've done here is create a
usage page and usage number ref,
and then added it to
the matching dictionary,
and then gone ahead and tried to
find all services matching that
particular dictionary or criteria.
Now that we've gone ahead
and grabbed the iterator,
we go ahead and try to cycle through
all the devices that we found,
or services that we found.
Now that we've found a device and
we're on that particular device,
the first thing we'll have
to do is actually create
the IOCF plugin interface.
And this is something that
you might be used to if you've
messed around with USB devices or
FireWire devices from user land.
Once you've acquired the
IOCF plugin interface,
let's go ahead and create an
interface to the HIID device itself.
And so we query the interface
of that plugin to acquire
the interface of the device.
Now that we've acquired the interface,
the first thing we need to do is
actually open a device for communication.
So like I mentioned earlier,
we have actually two different
options here for opening the device.
We can do a standard open,
which will just allow it to
communicate like it does before,
and everyone, all clients receive events.
Or you can actually perform
the seize right here,
which will just maintain
that you will get direct
communication with that device.
If you do actually aren't
able to seize the device,
you will get an error return back to you.
Now that we've had the device open,
we actually want to find the
capabilities of this device.
And so let's go ahead and
set up a matching dictionary
to find all the elements.
So what we do here is go ahead
and allocate a CFDictionary,
and then add-- let's say here
that we want to find all the
button elements on this device.
So what we do is go ahead and
add a usage page item inside the
dictionary covering the buttons page,
and then go ahead and try to find
all the buttons on that device.
And what it should do is return
back to you a CFArray containing
all the CFDictionary,
you know, registry entries for that
device or for that element,
particular elements.
Now that we've found all the elements,
we essentially want to
store all the cookies,
and the cookies are the unique
identifier to actually communicate
with that particular element.
And so we just kind of cycle through
the array and store all the cookies
into our own internal storage.
As kind of a quick test,
we should just go ahead
and grab the value,
the current value of the
first button that we saw,
and you could easily just do that.
Now that we've basically
interacted with the device,
we kind of want to see how to
actually create a queue interface,
or grab all the values from that
button behavior that we've seen before.
So what we want to do is
first create the queue.
So we allocate the queue
from the device interface,
and then we go ahead and create
an internal queue within there.
And so in this example,
we're only really creating a queue
that's about eight fields deep,
and that's pretty much
what we really need.
It's all that's essential for
us to interact with that device.
Now let's go ahead and cycle through all
the buttons that we've collected before
and add them individually to that queue.
Now that we've added the
elements to that queue,
we go ahead and set ourselves
up for asynchronous operation.
So what we do first is create
the async event source,
and what we do is we use this in
conjunction with the CF run loop.
And kind of what we set up here with
the HId Manager is we expect this
to work only with a CF run loop.
So after we've added the
event source to the run loop,
we go ahead and send the event call out.
And this is the callback function
that will call into your application
to go ahead and drain the queue.
So as soon as, you know,
events come on the queue,
we go ahead and trigger your application,
and we call your callback.
And now that we've got
this callback being called,
you go ahead and cycle through the queue
and determine and do whatever operation
you want to do on that particular event.
And it's pretty straightforward.
So now that we've covered
both device and queues,
let's go into the output
transaction interface.
And for this one,
we're not actually going to be using
the mouse that we described earlier,
but instead kind of a keyboard,
and assume that we've set
it up in the same manner.
So essentially what we have here
is a keyboard has both a caps lock,
an LED, and a scroll lock,
or a caps lock LED, a scroll lock LED,
and an unlock LED.
So what we do is go ahead and
create the transaction interface,
and then add those items
to the transaction.
Also what I'm going to do
is set the default values.
So basically what this is,
is after you've committed a transaction,
this is the value that this element
will revert to for the next time,
or each subsequent commit that
you do on this transaction.
So right now we're just
going to zero it all out.
Now that we've gone ahead and
set the default values and added
those elements to the transaction,
what we want to do is
set the element values.
So basically all we're concerned about
doing here is setting the LED values
for the caps lock and num lock.
So we go ahead and turn those
on and then set the values.
After we've done that,
we go ahead and commit the transaction.
And essentially what will happen
here is both the num lock LED and
the caps lock LED will turn on,
and the scroll lock LED will remain off.
Had we not actually included the
scroll lock LED into the transaction,
the value would have remained
the same value that it would
have been prior to the commit.
Because basically what we do is we do
not go ahead and change that value,
it just remains the same value.
So basically in summary,
I hope you've got a better understanding
of what a Human Interface Device is.
kind of a basic understanding of how
HIID is implemented on Mac OS X and basic
techniques for using the HIID Manager.
Some additional references are,
you can look at the HIID pages that
we have on our developer tech pubs,
or you can look at how to write a
device driver if you're so inclined.
And if you want a more in-depth
knowledge of how HIID actually works,
you can look at the USB IF's HIID pages.
With that,
I'll turn it over to Fernando Urbin,
of our USB team, to cover Force Feedback.
Thank you, Rob.
We're going to change gears a little bit
here and I'll talk about Force Feedback
and what we've done on Mac OS X.
I will start with a brief introduction
on what Force Feedback really is and
how we implemented an architecture to
support Force Feedback in our system.
Then I'm going to give some hints
to application developers on some
of the APIs and what they need
to do to support Force Feedback.
And then for those of you,
if there are any,
that have Force Feedback devices that are
not supported on the system right now,
what you will need to do in order
to provide support for your devices.
You'll see how Force Feedback
fits in our system.
Hopefully you'll understand why we
did what we did and the way we did it.
Perhaps you also know how
you can now take advantage of
Force Feedback and how you,
as I mentioned, will be able to develop a
plugin to work in our system.
So what is Force Feedback?
The official definition by those who
know is that it is a technology that
enhances the human computer interface
by engaging your sense of touch.
Over here on the podium we have
this Force Feedback steering wheel,
but it is important to know
that Force Feedback devices are
not limited to gaming devices.
Immersion has this medical
device that is used to train
medical professionals on how to perform
or how to put an injection on a person.
And it actually provides feedback when
the needle pierces the simulated skin.
And once it goes through the skin
when it actually finds the vein.
And it's really cool.
I am not a doctor nor
do I play one on TV.
But it feels just like the real thing.
And personally, you know,
I would like more nurses to...
Use this type of devices.
I mentioned Immersion.
They are the leader in
Force Feedback technology.
They have several patents,
and they actually license
their technology to several
hardware manufacturers.
So you'll see Force Feedback devices
that do not have the Immersion,
are not produced by Immersion,
but they have what they call their
TouchSense technology logo on the boxes.
Before we delve further into the APIs,
I would like to go through some
terminology so that you can understand
better what I'm talking about later on.
A Force Feedback Device is, first of all,
a USB HIID compliant device.
Now, the USB HIID working group has
a specification for what they
call Physical Interface Devices,
which are Force Feedback Devices.
Force Feedback devices do not have
to be compliant to this physical
interface device specification
in order to work in the system.
That's why we,
as we're going to see later,
have this hardware plugin architecture.
These devices are capable
of creating a force,
or what is called an effect,
that the user can feel when
they're using the device.
The effects themselves have
to be played through software.
You have to do something in order to
make that device create that feeling.
They can be done in either of two ways.
You can have a programmatic
interface where you download the
effect and then you massage it,
modify it, start, stop, etc.
Or actually,
if you can download something to the
device and have that device respond
automatically to an action by the user.
So, you know,
the most obvious one is when you
have a shoot-em-up game and the
person playing hits the trigger
and you get a recoil right away.
And it's a benefit that the device
does it automatically because you
don't have the latency of going up
to the application and coming back
down and setting up the effect.
There are really four
basic types of effects.
A constant force effect,
not surprisingly,
is a constant effect that
varies in any one direction.
A ramp effect is an effect that increases
in strength or decreases in strength,
again, in one direction.
Not surprisingly,
a periodic effect is one that
varies over time or over strength.
And then the final one are the condition
effects that are as shown on the slide,
the spring or the damper.
And those effects increase
in force as the device moves
away from the center line.
So, you know,
if you have a spring effect and
you're pulling away from the spring,
you know,
the force is going to increase as
you're going farther and farther down.
Briefly, some example of effects.
On a racing simulation,
you can have the pavement vary,
and your feedback is going to change
depending on whether you are driving
on the paved road or you're going
off-road and you're on a dirt road.
And if you have a flight simulation,
if you have turbulence, of course,
your stick can start
shaking and everything.
Again, this is not limited just
to gaming simulations.
There are some programs that make use of
Force Feedback on educational settings,
and you can have a pendulum or a...
We present details on the HID Manager and
the new Force Feedback Framework
delivered in Mac OS X 10.2.3,
and show you how to use both to give
users the ability to control and
feel your application's environment.
For Force Feedback device developers,
we describe how to add
support for your products.
So, how does Force Feedback
work on our system?
Last fall,
we decided to work with Immersion.
As I mentioned, they are the leaders on
Force Feedback technology.
And we work with them in order to bring
Force Feedback support on Mac OS X.
What we arrived at was
a two-pronged approach.
There's a Force Feedback Framework
for application developers,
and that Force Feedback Framework uses
some hardware vendor-specific drivers,
which we'll see later,
that are actually just CFPlugins,
to abstract the hardware so that the
Force Feedback Framework itself can
use any type of Force Feedback device.
We actually shipped support
for Force Feedback in the
December of last year,
the 10.2.3 release.
And initially we had support for
several devices with Immersion
TouchSense technology from Logitech,
from Immersion themselves,
from SciTech and several others.
A couple of weeks after release,
two games came out actually
supporting Force Feedback,
and that was the F1
Championship Series and
NASCAR Racing 2002.
Our goals when we started
looking into supporting
Force Feedback on Mac OS X was,
number one, we had a time to market.
[Transcript missing]
These were F1
Championship Series and NASCAR,
you know, those games existed on the PC.
We wanted to bring them over
and have wheels work with them.
And of course,
we wanted hardware manufacturers
to be able to support their
device on Mac OS X fairly easily.
I'm a big proponent on not having
to reinvent the wheel when there's
something that is acceptable and works.
Unfortunately,
we had as a partner Immersion,
and they have large expertise
in supporting Force Feedback
in different systems,
and they knew what worked in other
platforms and what didn't work.
So, we were fairly lucky to work
with them and leverage their
expertise in this field.
We came up with then the
following architecture.
As you see here at the top,
we have an application,
be it a game or an educational title.
And of course,
it is using the HIID Manager to
control the application.
[Transcript missing]
The vendor driver itself
then uses mostly set reports,
and this is why we had to add this
advanced APIs to the HIID Manager,
to send reports over to the device
so that it can do its effects.
Over the bubble on the right is the...
Vendor-specific code-less kegs,
and as we'll see later
for hardware developers,
it's just a method of allowing
the Force Feedback Framework
to find the driver that is
used by a particular device.
So let's go into the Force Feedback
Framework itself and what it is.
First of all, it is fairly similar to the
Force Feedback API that is
found in other architectures.
We have three basic types
of APIs in the framework.
One section is system-wide APIs,
and for your convenience,
we named them to start just with FF for,
not surprisingly, Force Feedback.
Then we have device-wide APIs that
deal just with effects on one device,
and those start with FF device.
And finally,
we have effect-wide APIs that, again,
not surprisingly,
deal with effects on a single device,
and those API names start with FF effect.
And try saying that three times fast.
System-wide Force Feedback APIs.
There are really only those
three APIs that are on the slide.
The most important one, actually,
is the FF is Force Feedback API.
As noted on the diagram earlier,
the application is already using a
HIT device to get input from the user.
And so you can use the IO service
object for that device to inquire
from the Force Feedback framework
on whether that device actually
has Force Feedback support or not.
And what the Force Feedback
framework then does,
as we'll see later, is look for the FF.
And then you can use the
CFPlugin for that device and see
if it exists and if it's available,
et cetera.
But, of course, if it's not supported,
then this will return false,
and you don't have to
provide Force Feedback.
Then the other two calls are,
and as you'll see there later,
everything matches.
You have a create device,
and once you're finished with it,
you have a release device.
Device-wide APIs are those that deal
with effects on a single device.
These are some examples
of the APIs themselves.
Again, we have a create effect and a
destroy effect or release effect API.
Some of the other APIs that you
encounter are the Get Force Feedback
capabilities that will allow a game to
actually know what the device can do.
Not all devices support all
types of effects at all.
If you're a racing game,
you need to know which
effects you can support.
The APIs also allow you to actually
send an effect to that device.
Now,
effect-wide APIs allows you to actually
send the effect down to the device,
and then to start, stop it, modify it,
and essentially manage
that effect on that device.
These devices are fairly
complex themselves,
and they have memory, and memory,
there's just a limited amount,
and so you sometimes have to
manage that memory yourself.
The plugin will do some of it for you,
but you'll have to manage some
of that yourself in some cases.
Again, some of the examples of this
API is download the effect,
unload the effect,
get the current parameters for that
effect that is already in the device,
so that you know what you need to change,
and you can start and stop it.
I'd like to say that the devil in
all these APIs are these structures.
They're quite complex if
you're not familiar with
Force Feedback implementation.
However,
you have to set up all these different
structures to have the right data,
so the devil is in the details or
in the structures used by the API.
Fortunately, these structures are very
similar to the structures that
are used in other platforms.
And if you remember my earlier
slide where one of our goals was
to make it easy for porting houses
to add Force Feedback to the
Mac OS X version of their games,
you can understand why this is so.
We have HeaderDoc'd the header
files pretty extensively.
And so you'll be able to grasp
some of the details from that.
And as I understand it,
the Microsoft developer side has
an extensive and quite complete
documentation on Force Feedback.
This is not to scare you,
but it's just a sample of what
sort of things need to be set
up in order to create an effect.
When we were working with Immersion,
Immersion created a tool to
test the Force Feedback API.
And now I'm going to give you
a little demo of this tool.
As you can see,
it's almost as complicated
as the slide I just showed.
But,
It allows you to test, you know, well,
it allowed us initially to test
whether our API was working.
Then hardware vendors used it
to test whether their hardware
plugin was doing the right thing,
because it's an easy way of
setting up all the parameters,
and I can tell you it's
all the parameters.
We are going to make this the binary
for this tool available on the developer
website in the very near future.
And then later on, actually,
we're going to release the
source code to this tool.
I'm just going to go
through a quick demo.
It'll be hard maybe for you
to see the wheel shaking,
but...
I want to make sure that
you know that it is real.
Here on the right are the
APIs related just like
I mentioned in the earlier slide,
just Force Feedback APIs,
device and effect APIs.
The first thing that you
need to do is create device.
This actually is going to go and tell us
whether this is a Force Feedback device.
Over here on the left,
it tells us that this is
the Logitech Momo Force.
It doesn't tell us that it's
the nice leather version of it,
but it's the expensive one.
We went and we created that device.
I'm just going to make simple calls.
That uses the default values.
So we go and we create an
effect that is a square effect,
a square wave effect,
and we go and start it.
and I will be presenting the
first part of this session.
- Hi, I'm Craig Keithley,
and I'm the Director of the Office of
the Human Interface Device Development.
I'm here to talk about the
new Force Feedback Framework.
The first thing we're gonna
do is to create a new Format,
and we're gonna create a new Format.
And now it shakes a little harder.
And finally,
we are going to change the duration
from three gazillion to nine gazillion.
And I need to release that
effect and create and start,
and now it'll go ahead and run
for a longer period of time.
So again, for application developers,
this is useful sort of to test the
kind of effects that you can use on the
device that you're targeting supports.
And of course, for hardware vendors,
it's a way of verifying that
their plugin does everything
that they expect it to do.
So we can go back to the slides.
Now I'm going to go and talk for
a little bit about what hardware
vendors need to do in order to support
their devices in our architecture.
As I mentioned earlier,
the hardware plugin abstracts
the hardware so that the
Force Feedback Framework can use
any type of Force Feedback device.
Second bullet, not surprisingly again,
this is very similar to the
Force Feedback drivers that are
supported in other architectures.
So if you have experience with those,
you'll feel right at home.
I actually,
with some of the hardware vendors that
I worked with when we were developing
their drivers and our support,
One of them has exactly the
same code base for both the
Wintel platform and our platform.
And of course that is a big win.
And he was able to give us his driver
in a very short amount of time.
But compatible and everything.
It is a CFPlugin just like IOHitLib,
IOUSBlib.
Like I mentioned on the diagram,
how we use to inform the force
feedback framework that a,
Particular device supports
the Force Feedback is we
use this code like text.
And if you're not familiar
with the USB matching criteria
that is used in our system,
there's Q&A 1076, if I'm not mistaken,
that abstracts what the
USB Common Class Specification 1.0
says with respect to how USB devices
and interfaces should match.
And we use this to,
and a code like text just means
that it's a text with no binaries,
it's just a plist.
And we use this plist to
merge a dictionary into a
USB interface node of the device,
and the Force Feedback Framework
later will find this node.
And what this dictionary has
is a UUID path key value.
And it's a UUID pair that tells
the Force Feedback Framework where
the plugin for this device is,
and what the UUID it is,
so that it can go ahead and open it.
This is a project builder sample
of the P-List for a Codelex text,
and actually this is a sample project,
the WhizzyBank Force Feedback
device that we have.
As you can see highlighted,
we have a dictionary,
the IO-CF Plugin Types Dictionary,
and again,
this is a standard I/O Kit name
for this dictionary,
and it has a UUID and
a path to the plugin,
and in this case,
it lives at sampleforcefeedback KEXT.
Notice that it starts at the KEXT level,
so you don't have to put
system library extensions.
It assumes that it is there,
and so it needs to be there.
Again, the matching criteria over here
is the matching criteria for
an I/O USB interface device.
You should also note that our
class for this driver is the system
supplied I/O USB HIID driver,
com.apple.iop.iousb_hiddriver.
And because we added support for
setReport and getReport in 10.2.3,
you have to depend on version 1.9.4
of the HIID driver and on version
1.2.1 of the I/O USB HIID driver.
Finally, the last item there is
the OS bundle required,
and it says that it is SafeBoot.
And you have to do this
because our system supplied
HIID driver is SafeBoot as well,
and if you didn't do it,
then you wouldn't participate
in the matching for your device,
and it wouldn't work.
Finally, the hardware plugin,
as I mentioned earlier,
the IO Force Feedback lib.h defines
the interface for the plugin.
It is a CFPlugin architecture,
so it's a COM interface,
very similar to other platforms.
You need to generate your
own UUID for your plugin.
Universally unique identifier.
Do not use the UUID that
is in the sample project.
In fact, it won't compile without having
to remove a comment from the
UUID that I provide there.
So you know that you have
to go and generate your own.
If not, it's not unique,
and another vendor that
uses it will clash with it,
and things won't work.
The system provides a
tool to generate a UUID,
and so all you need to do is UUID gen,
and there you go, it has it.
As I mentioned also,
the interface file itself
is pretty well HeaderDoc'd.
The Microsoft developer site has, again,
some good information on Force Feedback.
And we will be making available a sample
Force Feedback plugin project that,
you know, there's a lot of overhead
involved in creating a CFPlugin,
and, you know, it doesn't change
between implementations.
So, there's just a skeleton project
that provides the required methods,
and you just have to go and do
the hard part and fill in the
blanks to actually use your device.
So I hope that you've gotten
an understanding of what
Force Feedback devices are and why
you would use them in our system,
how we actually implemented
Force Feedback in Mac OS X.
And if you are an application
developer or a hardware developer,
you know how to start
using Force Feedback.
Again, I would like to thank Immersion
for their partnership in developing
the Force Feedback Framework.
We did it in, I believe, record time.
It was like,
- Three months or four
months from when we started,
when we decided to support Force Feedback
and when we actually delivered it.
And we missed an earlier
update just by that much,
so.
Just for the DVD benefit,
those are some sessions that
would be useful for you if you
are learning about Force Feedback.
And with that, we'll close the session.
There's the emails of the usual suspects.